Article: Scratching the web (#261)
iodigital-com/io-technology: data/blog/scratching-the-web.md

---
title: 'Scratching the web'
date: '2024-08-26'
tags: ['frontend', 'js', 'Audio']

> summary: 'Using the Web Audio API to create a realtime turntable.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: 'How can we use the Web Audio API to create a working realtime turntable? Read my approach and how you might make your own!'
```

authors: ['pim-van-die']
theme: 'blue'

> ---

Reviewer: Can you add a cover image (see other articles). It adds the image at the top and is used in the OpenGraph image. Perhaps a screenshot of the end result?

> Browsers are awesome. The capabilities are almost endless with API's like WebRTC, WebGL, canvas, or the Web Audio API. This article will focus on the latter. And although it can do a lot, here I'm only going to touch the basics. Using it to control and reverse audio to create a working turntable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Browsers are awesome. The capabilities are almost endless with API's like WebRTC, WebGL, canvas, or the Web Audio API. This article will focus on the latter. Although the Web Audio API can do a lot, I'm only going to cover the basics. I'll use it to control and reverse audio to create a working turntable!
```

> The article will be in a few parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article will consist of a few parts:
```

1.  The record: making it spin and able to drag cq. scratch
2.  The audio: loading, reversing and controlling the playback speed

> 3.  Tying the record to the audio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  Trying the record to the audio
```

Author: I used "tying" as in, tying 2 things together / connecting

_For the sake of the length of the article, the provided code blocks are simplified and are more like examples than actual implementations. Please refer to the [Github repo here](https://github.com/pimskie/scratch) for the actual code._

> An example of what can be made: [The turntable](https://pimskie.github.io/scratch/)

Reviewer: Maybe nice to add a GIF or VIdeo below this line?

Author: I added the youtube Iframe

## The record

A real turntable consists of a multitude of elements, but for this article, I'll focus on the record.

### What should the record do?

> 

Reviewer: A bit of storytelling here miught be nice. e.g.:

_So, first we need to determine what functionality the record should have. In essence, this comes down to these three:_

These little lines make the article read a bit nice IMO

- Rotate: Whether "by hand" or automatically.
- Stop: When it is clicked, it should stop. Simulating a finger pressed on the record.
- Dragging: Simulating the scratching effect, going back and forth.

### The Record implementation

> It should have some properties

Reviewer: _To implement this, we need to define a few properies:_ etc

  isDragging = false;
}
```

Now a little math is required to determine the angle that was dragged. Take given example image:

![Calculating the angle](/articles/scratching-the-web/calculate-angle.svg)

The user clicks on spot "A", and moves the pointer towards "B". The center of the record is at "C".  
The angle between "A" and "C", and "B" and "C" need to be calculated.  
The difference between "AC" and "BC" is "D", the angle dragged.

The three built-in functions needed for the calculations are `Math.atan2`, `Math.sin`, and `Math.cos`.
With those 2 helper functions can be made:

```JS
const angleBetween = (vec1: Vector, vec2: Vector) = Math.atan2(vec2.y - vec1.y, vec2.x - vec1.x);
const angleDifference = ({ x, y }: Vector) => Math.atan2(Math.sin(x - y), Math.cos(x - y));

onPointerMove({ x, y }) {
  const B: Vector = { x: clientX, y: clientY };

  // A stored `onPointerDown`
  const AC = angleBetween(center, A);
  const BC = angleBetween(center, B);

  const D = angleDifference({ x: AC, y: BC });

  setAngle(angle - D);
}
```

Now the only thing needed is a looping function to update the record visual:

```JS
loop() {
  if (!isDragging) {
    setAngle(angle + 0.05);
  }

>   element.style.transform = `rotate(${angle}rad)`;

Reviewer: Ha didn't know about the `rad` unit, nice!

Author: That's rad! 🤘

const audioBuffer = new AudioBuffer(...)
audioBufferReversed.getChannelData(0).set(channelDataReversed);
```

> _Is it worth it? Let me work it  
> I put my thang down, flip it and reverse it  
> Ti esrever dna ti pilf nwod gnaht ym tup i_ - Missy Elliot

So when two audio buffers are available, they can easily be switched depending on the playback speed. For example:

```JS
const buffer = isReversed
  ? audioBufferReversed
  : audioBuffer;

const cueTime = isReversed
  ? soundDuration - timePlayed
  : timePlayed;

audioSource = new AudioBufferSourceNode(audioContext);
audioSource.buffer = buffer;
audioSource.start(0, cueTime);
```

## Tying the record to the audio

One way to structure the project is as follows:

- App
  - Record
  - Audio

Where "Record" contains all the functionality from part 1, "Audio" all the functionality from part 2, and "App" orchestrates the working.

An easy implementation is when "Record" updates (the "loop" function), it calls a callback function in "App". "App" uses the payload from the callback to update the "Audio" accordingly. See this diagram:

![Callback and update](/articles/scratching-the-web/update.svg)

For example:

> ```JS
> // Record.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```JS:Record.js
```

Reviewer: This adds the filename in a fancy way to the codeblock :)

Author: Cool, didn't know that

loop() {
  this.callbacks.onLoop({ speed, reversed, offset });
}
```

> ```JS
> // App.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```JS:App.js
```

record.callbacks.onLoop = (updatePayload) => {
  sampler.updateSpeed(updatePayload);
};
```

> ```JS
> // Audio.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```JS:Audio.js
```

updateSpeed({ playbackSpeed, reversed, secondsPlayed }) {
  if (reversed !== isReversed) {
    changeDirection(reversed, secondsPlayed);
  }

  const speedAbsolute = Math.abs(playbackSpeed);

  audioSource.playbackRate.cancelScheduledValues(currentTime);
  audioSource.playbackRate.linearRampToValueAtTime(speedAbsolute, currentTime);
}
```

After making a quick "UI" representing the turntable, the final result:

> [A turntable](https://pimskie.github.io/scratch/)

Reviewer: Maybe nice to add a GIF or VIdeo below this line?

Author: Good idea, done

> [A turntable](https://pimskie.github.io/scratch/)

Reviewer: I feel like it might be nice to properly wrap up your article here. For example,

_So there we have it! A fully working turntable in the browser using the Web Audio API. Make sure to check the final product out here._ etc

Author: Totally right, thanks. This was indeed more like "that was it, thanks and bye"
